article: Introduction to Zephyr OS Tracing and Profiling (#174)
espressif/developer-portal: content/blog/zephyr-tracing-and-profiling/index.md

﻿---
title: "Introduction to Zephyr OS Tracing and Profiling"
date: 2024-10-25T06:54:17+08:00
showAuthor: false
featureAsset: "featured-gauge.webp"
authors:
  - "raffael-rostagno"
tags: ["ESP32", "Tracing",  "Profiling","Zephyr"]
---

## Overview

> Embedded systems can be quite complex, depending on the architecture, application size and nature. Even for an experienced embedded developer, understanding the interplay of threads, interrupts and many processes that run in a large application can be challenging in a situation where debugging, evaluating hardware adequacy or optimizing application code is necessary. We humans are (mostly) visual by nature, and having the means to *visualize* what is happening in a given system can really open up possibilities. Without the right tools we are often in the dark, quite literally.

Reviewer: `interrupts and many processes that run in a large application can be challenging in a situation where debugging, evaluating hardware adequacy or optimizing application code is necessary.`
This part sounds too large. `interrupts and many processes that run in a large application can be challenging` could be the end of the sentence.

> Embedded systems can be quite complex, depending on the architecture, application size and nature. Even for an experienced Embedded developer, understanding the interplay of threads, interrupts and many processes that run in a large application can be challenging in a situation where debugging, evaluating hardware adequacy or optimizing application code is necessary. We humans are (mostly) visual by nature, and having the means to *visualize* what is happening in a given system can really open up possibilities. Without the right tools we are often in the dark, quite literally.

Reviewer 2: "Embedded developer" -> "embedded developer" ?

> One category of tools interesting to learn about is Tracing and Profiling. *Tracing* means to collect software execution data - the sequence and timing of execution of functions, threads, ISRs - and log it for posterior analysis, without interrupting or interfering (at best) in the application execution. *Profiling* aims to measure performance metrics such as execution time, CPU usage and dynamic memory usage. With such tools it is possible to evaluate how well an embedded system is performing, understand if the hardware used is adequate for the application being run and debug eventual problems.

Reviewer: `metrics such as execution time`
to
`metrics as such as execution time`

> In this article we are going to do a brief introduction and show some basic examples of these resources as implemented in Zephyr RTOS. Later we’ll take a look at some of the features offered by Percepio’s Tracealyzer, which is a third party solution that extends some of Zephyr's *tracing and profiling* native functionalities and offers a front-end tool to analyze the data.

Reviewer: `and offers a front-end tool to analyze the data.`
I would remove `and offers`:
`as a front-end tool to analyze the data.`

## Zephyr’s tracing tool

> In order to show how Zephyr’s native tracing system works, we’ll use the sample below and an ESP32-C6 to run it on a physical device:

Reviewer: I would suggest avoid using `will` in general:
`we’ll use the sample below and an ESP32-C6 to run it on a physical device:`
to
`ESP32-C6 board target is used with the following sample code:`

`samples/subsys/tracing`

To enable Zephyr’s native tracing, a small number of options are available. For this example, which uses ESP32-C6’s USB JTAG port to output the logged data, we’ll set the following:

> ```

Reviewer 3: Do not leave without the type. In this case, use: ```text

CONFIG_TRACING=y
CONFIG_TRACING_CTF=y
CONFIG_TRACING_BACKEND_UART=y
CONFIG_TRACING_BUFFER_SIZE=4096
```

These settings activate the tracing feature, defines the data stored format as CTF (Common Trace Format) and configures the output medium (UART). As UART was selected as the medium to transfer data from the device to the host (PC), we’ll define the following settings in an overlay file within the sample:

> ```

Reviewer 3: Same here.

/ {
    chosen {
        zephyr,tracing-uart = &usb_serial;
    };
};

&usb_serial {
    status = "okay";
};
```

In order to build the sample we’ll use the following command:

> ```console

Reviewer 2: IIRC the content type should be "shell". Also, I'm not sure if "dts" means something to this renderer.

> west build -p -b esp32c6_devkitc samples/subsys/tracing/ -DCONF_FILE=prj_uart_ctf.conf -p

Reviewer: Duplicated `-p`.

```

Once the sample is flashed, we can switch the USB cable to the USB port of the ESP32-C6 board and activate Zephyr’s python script to connect to the serial port and store the acquired data in a log file:

```shell
python3 scripts/tracing/trace_capture_uart.py -d /dev/ttyACM0 -b 115200 -o ../tracing/trace_0
```

The option -o indicates the path and file name for the tracing data, so any path and name can be used. In this example we’ll use an arbitrary folder called “tracing” just outside Zephyr's main folder.

After some seconds of acquisition we can hit CTRL+C to stop recording and get back to the shell in the host PC.

The tracing format CTF requires data typing to be decoded, so we’ll copy the metadata (tracing format description) file to the same folder:

```shell
cp subsys/tracing/ctf/tsdl/metadata ../tracing/
```

Finally, to parse the CTF data and show the actual trace:

```shell
babeltrace2 ../tracing/
```

The output is something like:

<a href="img/img001.webp" target="_blank">
    {{< figure
        default=true
        src="img/img001.webp"
        alt=""
        caption="Sample trace output"
    >}}
</a>

> This log shows the execution order and timing of the traced objects, allowing us to visualize how the software is executing in the acquired interval. This gives the possibility of running statistics on how the CPU resources are used and easily spot functions that are taking too long to execute, are being executed at wrong moments or more times than expected.

Reviewer: last sentence sounds a bit off the whole phrasing:
`, are being executed at wrong moments or more times than expected.`

### Objects monitored

It is possible to control which kinds of objects are monitored. The following are currently supported [[1]]:

> ```

Reviewer 3: and here.

struct k_timer *_track_list_k_timer;
struct k_mem_slab *_track_list_k_mem_slab;
struct k_sem *_track_list_k_sem;
struct k_mutex *_track_list_k_mutex;
struct k_stack *_track_list_k_stack;
struct k_msgq *_track_list_k_msgq;
struct k_mbox *_track_list_k_mbox;
struct k_pipe *_track_list_k_pipe;
struct k_queue *_track_list_k_queue;
struct k_event *_track_list_k_event;
```

> Kconfig's menu *Tracing Configuration* will allow to select which objects will be traced, with options like shown below:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Kconfig's menu *Tracing Configuration* will allows selecting which objects will be traced, with options like shown below:

```

> ```

Reviewer 3: Same for the others.

TRACING_SYSCALL=y/n
TRACING_ISR=y/n
TRACING_SEMAPHORE=y/n
TRACING_HEAP=y/n
TRACING_STACK=y/n
TRACING_PM=y/n
(...)
```

If a large amount of data is to be generated, this might be useful to limit tracing only to the objects of interest, both to save buffer and provide a cleaner data acquisition.

> Another interesting feature is the possibility of defining user functions to be called at tracing events, as *headers* shown below. In a debugging situation or when external equipment (e.g oscilloscope or data logger) is used, it can be useful to add custom code to the callbacks to drive a GPIO, for instance, in order to sync external acquisition data with the log provided by the *tracing* subsystem.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Another interesting feature is the possibility of defining user functions to be called at tracing events, such as *headers* shown below. In a debugging situation or when external equipment (e.g., oscilloscope or data logger) is used, it can be useful to add custom code to the callbacks to drive a GPIO, for instance, in order to sync external acquisition data with the log provided by the *tracing* subsystem.

```

<a href="img/img002.webp" target="_blank">
    {{< figure
        default=true
        src="img/img002.webp"
        alt=""
        caption="Trace user functions"
    >}}
</a>

> The following macros [[2]] are placed on Zephyr's subsystems code to track important functions of the operating system:

Reviewer 4: I see that the intention here is to show the number 2 that refers to link 2 in additional links. However, the rendered version of the section _Additional links_ does not have numbers.

Please find a way to fix it here and for all other numbered references in the article.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f8f9eb06-c417-4601-a2d3-e79a107b8725)

```
SYS_PORT_TRACING_FUNC(type, func, …)
SYS_PORT_TRACING_FUNC_ENTER(type, func, …)
SYS_PORT_TRACING_FUNC_EXIT(type, func, ...)
```

This means that depending on the functionality being probed, the *tracing* subsystem might already have hooks that will acquire data by default, as can be seen in the example below:

> ```c

Reviewer: Sounds there is issues with the formatting here. Try removing the `c`.

Reviewer 3: I see no issues.
<img width="685" alt="Screenshot 2024-11-04 at 09 13 42" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b7a2ddc4-5cdf-4e84-977d-558b83d10168">

Author: I couldn't notice problems as well

/* Called when data needs to be sent to network */
int net_send_data(struct net_pkt *pkt)
{
    int status;
    int ret;

    SYS_PORT_TRACING_FUNC_ENTER(net, send_data, pkt);

    (...)
}
```

Instrumenting application, however, is currently not supported without manually implementing some code inside the *tracing* subsystem. For the time being, there are 3rd party tools that support such feature, and a new tool is expected to be integrated to Zephyr in the future that might as well support it [[3]].

## Zephyr's profiling tool

The current profiling implementation monitors the function stack in order to allow examining the software execution at given intervals. To enable it, the following configs must be defined:

```text
CONFIG_PROFILING=y
CONFIG_PROFILING_PERF=y
CONFIG_PROFILING_PERF_BUFFER_SIZE=2048
CONFIG_THREAD_STACK_INFO=y
CONFIG_SMP=n
CONFIG_SHELL=y
CONFIG_FRAME_POINTER=y
```

> Using these directives it is possible to obtain a log that can be processed by tools and yield a composed view of what the system is executing:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Using these directives it is possible to obtain a log that can be processed by tools and that can yield a composed view of what the system is executing:

```

<a href="img/img003.webp" target="_blank">
    {{< figure
        default=true
        src="img/img003.webp"
        alt=""
        caption="Profiling sample graph"
    >}}
</a>

> The graph above shows a timeline of the functions pushed onto the stack, including all subfunction calls. While monitoring the function stack can be useful for analyzing certain kinds of problems, we won’t discuss this feature in detail, as it offers limited functionality for now. As mentioned earlier, a new subsystem is being developed that may provide better functionality [[3]].

Reviewer 2: maybe "sub-function" for better readability

> ## Percepio’s Tracealyzer

Reviewer: Please review all `'s` used in the documentation. In the case above, `Percepio´s` should be `Percepio's`. There are other places like `Zephyr´s` instead of `Zephyr's`.

Zephyr offers support to third party tools that use the tracing subsystem and extend some of its functionalities in order to provide more resources. One of them is Percepio’s Tracealyzer. To enable it, the following configs must be set:

```
CONFIG_TRACING=y
CONFIG_PERCEPIO_TRACERECORDER=y
```

The directions to configure a streaming port or use a RAM buffer to store the logged data can be found in reference [[4]].

> Tracealyzer offers a front-end tool to analyze and process the collected data, rendering very visual the task of checking how the system is behaving dynamically:

Reviewer: `rendering very visual the task of checking how the system is..`
Suggest: `visually rendering how the system is...`

> Tracealyzer offers a frontend tool to analyze and process the collected data, rendering very visual the task of checking how the system is behaving dynamically:

Reviewer 2: maybe use "front-end"

<a href="img/img004.webp" target="_blank">
    {{< figure
        default=true
        src="img/img004.webp"
        alt=""
        caption="Tracealyzer GUI"
    >}}
</a>

> The process of instrumenting the code and selecting the right data to be acquired is analogous to using an oscilloscope or other kind of probe to evaluate hardware. One might need to place additional *hooks* (instrumentation for the tracing system to acquire data at a specific point) in the application code and change the base configuration to select or limit data acquisition to interest.

Reviewer 4: `to interest` is kind of hanging in the air here. How about something like this:

```suggestion
The process of instrumenting the code and selecting the right data to be acquired is analogous to using an oscilloscope or other kind of probe to evaluate hardware. One might need to place additional *hooks* (instrumentation for the tracing system to acquire data at a specific point) in the application code and change the base configuration to narrow data acquisition down to the areas of interest.

```

> The windows above contain data including the software execution sequence (as seen before with Zephyr native’s *tracing*), charts for CPU load, and plots for used acquired data. Embedded in the tool there are reports which facilitate evaluating tasks/threads performance to check:

Reviewer: What is "The windows above"?

Reviewer: I meant the image above?

- CPU Usage
- Execution times
- Response times
- Periodicity
- Separation
- Fragmentation

These statistics can help an experienced developer spot problems with any of the subsystems, as well as check timing and CPU load under any execution regime. Any anomaly can lead to a detailed investigation on what’s hindering performance, including glitches that will only be visible when enough data is collected.

> Another interesting capability of Tracealyzer is helping monitor heap utilization. The following graph shows memory allocation/deallocation over time, and it is paired with the synchronized *trace view* right below it. This renders possible to see if memory is allocated and freed accordingly or if memory leaks might be happening.

Reviewer 2: "de-allocation" seems better here

<a href="img/img005.webp" target="_blank">
    {{< figure
        default=true
        src="img/img005.webp"
        alt=""
        caption="Memory heap trace example"
    >}}
</a>

If memory leaks were present, allocation would only increase with time instead of reaching a mean usage level.

> Another example of use case is to analyze the interaction between threads and shared resources such as message queues. Spotting problems like producers-consumers can be difficult, specially if it's a glitch. If a synchronized signal can be added to the acquisition to help pointing to the timestamp where the problem is happening - say, when a symptom is visible to the outside world - the acquired data can be very useful to solve the problem.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Another use case can be analysis of the interaction between threads and shared resources, such as message queues. Spotting problems like producers-consumers can be difficult, specially if it's a glitch. If a synchronized signal can be added to the acquisition in order to point to the timestamp where the problem is happening - say, when a symptom is visible to the outside world - the acquired data can be very useful in solving the problem.

```

> Another example of use case is to analyze the interaction between threads and shared resources such as message queues. Spotting problems like producers-consumers can be difficult, specially if it’s a glitch. If a synchronized signal can be added to the acquisition to help pointing to the timestamp where the problem is happening - say, when a symptom is visible to the outside world - the acquired data can be very useful to solve the problem.

Reviewer: "as such as"

Author: I think this one is correct too

<a href="img/img006.webp" target="_blank">
    {{< figure
        default=true
        src="img/img006.webp"
        alt=""
        caption="Producer-consumer example"
    >}}
</a>

> The examples below show custom channels added to capture application data:

Reviewer: `application's data`

<a href="img/img007.webp" target="_blank">
    {{< figure
        default=true
        src="img/img007.webp"
        alt=""
        caption="Custom channel state transitions"
    >}}
</a>

<a href="img/img008.webp" target="_blank">
    {{< figure
        default=true
        src="img/img008.webp"
        alt=""
        caption="Custom channel signals"
    >}}
</a>

## Final remarks

> While these examples are generic and the amount of possibilities that *tracing* and *profiling* tools can offer is vast, this article is meant to just scratch the surface and share some insights on how powerful these tools can be. Even though they may be more applicable to analyze complex systems, it is well worth knowing them, as they may happen to be just the right tool for a specific problem. Besides that, even for use cases that require high reliability, using them with the intent of *profiling* the system in order to check how it behaves over time and certify its performance can be probably the best approach, as you'll have real data to back up the perception that it is performing as intended.

Reviewer 4: This paragraph is pretty long. Suggest splitting it into two. The first paragraphs briefly mentions the scope of this article, while the second one reiterates how knowing the information presented in this article can be helpful.

```suggestion
While these examples are generic and the amount of possibilities that *tracing* and *profiling* tools can offer is vast, this article just scratches the surface in sharing some insights on how powerful these tools can be.

Even though these examples may be more applicable to analyzing complex systems, it is well worth knowing them, as they may happen to be just the right tool for a specific problem. Besides that, even for use cases that require high reliability, using them with the intent of *profiling* the system in order to check how it behaves over time and certify its performance can be probably the best approach, as you'll have real data to back up the perception that it is performing as intended.

```

> ## Additional links

Reviewer 4: How about naming it _Resources_?

Also, please fix the link numbering as mentioned in a comment above.
